# LncCat
Background: Long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) is one of the important types of transcripts, which plays essential regulatory roles in cancers and disease developments without protein-coding ability. Next-generation sequencing technology has generated numerous transcripts. Discovery and identification of new lncRNAs is a fundamental step for research on mechanisms of cancer. Small ORFs (sORFs) were once thought to have a lower capacity to translate proteins. However, recent studies have shown that sORFs can also encode peptides. Therefore, identifying lncRNA with sORFs can contribute to discovering more novel regulation factors.
Results: In this paper, we propose a model called LncCat based on category boosting (CatBoost) and ORF-attention features to identify lncRNA. LncCat integrates five types of information to encode transcript sequences and utilizes CatBoost to construct a prediction model. Furthermore, the comparison of visualization reflects that lncRNAs and protein-coding transcripts are significantly different in ORF-attention features. The results show that LncCat achieves significant improvements on several benchmark datasets. The Matthew’s Correlation Coefficient (MCC) of LncCat achieves 0.9503, 0.9219, 0.8591, 0.8672 and 0.9047 on the human, mouse, zebrafish, wheat and chicken datasets, respectively, which improves by 1.90%~7.82%, 1.49%~17.63%, 6.11%~21.50%, 3.02%~51.64% and 5.35%~26.90%, respectively. Moreover, LncCat dramatically improves the MCC by at least 6.88%, 22.98% and 39.43% on sORFs test datasets of human, mouse and zebrafish, respectively.
Conclusions: Based on the comparing results, LncCat shows higher performance on multiple long ORF and small ORF datasets. by enhancing ORF-related features. Moreover, a user-friendly web server is developed for academics at http://cczubio.top/lnccat/.
Keywords: LncRNAs identification, Ensemble learning, ORF-attention features, Small ORF
